The example problem provided in this folder demonstrates a more realistic problem compared to the suite of test cases. This example requires one forced substrate, or substrate metabolite that must be be consumed in the synthesis of the target product, one targe product metabolite that must be synthesized from the available substrates, and a set of 21 currency metabolites identified from the literature that are need not necessarily be consumed in the synthesis of the target product, but are available if necessary for that synthesis. Additionally, there are 100 OTUs identified in human stool samples with the metabolic reactions they can catalyze, given by PICRUST gene predictions.

Given the problem definition, the next step in the process is to generate the ilp formulation of the problem produced by this software. Two examples are provided here: the ilp formulation for the full network described as a bipartite graph where metabolic reactions can have multiple substrates and products and the ilp formulation for the simplified network described as a graph where each metabolic reaction is split into separate sub-reactins between each individual substrate and each individual product.

After generating the ilp formulation of the problem, this formulation is passed to an ILP solver such as the COIN-OR ILP solver and this solver generates an output file containing the solution to the ilp formulation, given as the values of the ILP variables. One ILP output file exists for each version of the provided example, one for the full network version and one for the simple network version.

Finally, the ILP solver output can be parsed to obtain the identifies of the species variables with a value of 1, indicating that those species were used in the solution set of species. In this example, the full network version of the problem requires a minimum of 4 species to catalyze the specified metabolism, while in the simple version only 2 species are needed.

##### Description of Process and Files

`example_problem_definition.txt`: The problem definition for this example.

###### Full Network Process

`../bin/write_problem_definition example_problem_definition.txt > example_ilp_formulation.txt`

`example_ilp_formulation.txt`: The ILP formulation of the example problem for the full network.

`/path/to/cbc -import example_ilp_formulation.txt -branchAnd -solution example_cbc_output.txt`

`example_cbc_output.txt`: The ILP solver output generated by the COIN-OR ILP solver for the full network version of the example problem.

`../bin/get_solution_species example_cbc_output.txt > `example_solution_species.txt`

`example_solution_species.txt`: The solution set of species for the full network version of the example problem.

###### Simple Network Process

`../bin/write_problem_definition -s example_problem_definition.txt > example_simple_ilp_formulation.txt`

`example_simple_ilp_formulation.txt`: The ILP formulation of the example problem for the simple network.

`/path/to/cbc -import example_simple_ilp_formulation.txt -branchAnd -solution example_simple_cbc_output.txt`

`example_simple_cbc_output.txt`: The ILP solver output generated by the COIN-OR ILP solver for the simple network version of the example problem.

`../bin/get_solution_species example_simple_cbc_output.txt > `example_simple_solution_species.txt`

`example_simple_solution_species.txt`: The solution set of species for the simple network version of the example problem.