This file contains instructions for obtaining, compiling, and using the microbial community design algorithm.  This algorithm takes in a set of species with associated metabolic reactions, a set of substrate metabolites, and a set of product metabolites.  The algorithm then finds a minimal community that has the metabolic capacity for converting the specified substrates into the desired products.

### DOWNLOAD:

The source code for the community design algorithm can be obtained by cloning the git repository:

`git clone git@github.com:engal/community_design.git`

or downloading the compressed repository via the command line:

```
wget https://github.com/engal/community_design/archive/master.tar.gz
tar -zxf community_design-master.tar.gz
```

or downloading the zip file directly from the webpage:

https://github.com/engal/community_design

##### Downloading the CBC ILP solver

Pre-built binaries for CBC, the ILP solver we recommend, can be downloaded from [here](http://ampl.com/products/solvers/open-source/#cbc).

### COMPILATION:

In the home directory of this project (where this README.md is located), first perform the necessary setup by typing:

`./setup`

If you have downloaded or compiled the CBC binary, then you can specify the binary's location during setup:

`./setup -c /path/to/cbc`

Once you have finished the setup, you can compile by typing:

`make`

To test the code after compilation, you can then type

`make test`

### USE:

After compilation, you will have an executable called `design_community` in the bin directory.  `design_community` functions as a wrapper for three other executables: `write_design_problem`, `cbc` (if you have downloaded it), and `get_solution_species`.  `design_community` takes one argument: a file representing the entire problem definition, including the list of available substrates, and substrates that the community must be able to convert to other metabolites, the desired products, and the mapping of which species can catalyze which reactions:

`./design_community problem_definition_file`

The output is then a list of species in the minimal solution community found by the algorithm printed to stdout.

##### Example Files

In addition to the suite of included tests that display minimal, contrived problems, the `example` folder contains an example of much more realistic problem including the problem definition, the ilp input and output that are generated by this software for use by the COIN-OR ILP solver, and solution sets of species that can catazlye the specified metabolism. A more detailed description of the `example` folder is given in the `example` folder `README` file.

##### Advanced Usage

There are a few advanced options available when using `design_community`.

###### Simple Graph Interpretation

Depending on the application, you may desire a less strict interpretation of the metabolic network.  For instance, you may want to ensure a set of metabolic reactions can convert your available substrates to your desired products, but you don't care whether there may be cofactors or additional metabolites required to perform this conversion.  The `-s` flag causes the algorithm to treat the metabolic network of the provided species as a simple graph, where each multi-substrate->multi-product reaction from the original network is split into single-substrate->sigle-product reactions.  For example, if there was a reaction

`A + B -> C + D`

the new simple reactions would be

```
A -> C
A -> D
B -> C
B -> D
```

and so calling `design_community` using this simple graph interpretation would look like this:

`./design_community -s problem_definition_file`

###### Compartmentalized Problem Definitions

In contrast to simplifying the graph interpretation, it may someimes be necessary to deal with a compartmentalized model of species metabolism. In such a model, metabolites no longer flow freely between species but instead require appropriate uptake and secretion reactions to transfer metabolites. A compartmentalized problem can be defined by labeling metabolites as species-specific or environmental. Transport reactions are encoded as metabolic reactions that convert environmental metabolites to the corresponding species-specific metabolite or vice versa while other metabolic reactions within a species convert species-specific substrates to species-specific products. Defining such a compartmentalized problem can be done manually, but we have implemented a script, `compartmentalize_problem_definition`, to aid users in generationg compartmentalized problem definitions more easily. To use the script, first define an environmental metabolite label (by default, this label is the prefix `env`). Currently, we assume all available substrates and target products are environmental metabolites and the script adds the label as necessary. Using this label, add transport reactions to the species metabolic network definitions as reactions of the form `env_metabolite -> metabolite` or `metabolite -> env_metabolite` for uptake and secretion reactions respectively. Then run the script as follows:

`./compartmentalize_problem_definition problem_definition_with_transport_reactiond_file > compartmentalized_problem_definition_file`

The `compartmentalized_problem_definition_file` will now have species-associated labels assigned to all non-environmental metabolites in the species' metabolic networks such that all non-transport reactions in a species' metabolic network have substrates and products with the same species-specific label. By labeling metabolites in this manner, the algorithm can then only use paths that convert a metabolite in one species to a the same metabolite in another species via the appropriate intermediate transport reactions. Such a path transferrint metabolite `A` from species `1` to species `2` would look like this:

```
A_species1 -> env_A
env_A -> A_species2
```

where both of these reactions are transport reactions. Additionally, a metabolic reaction within species `1` concerting metabolite `A` to metabolite `B` would look like:

`A_species1 -> B_species1`

###### Forced Substrate Usage

Normally, the algorithm treats substrates as a pool of available resources, not caring about which particular available substrates are used to create the desired products.  However, there may be cases where you want to ensure that the designed community can make use of a specific substrate or set of substrates.  To achieve this, you can include a section the problem definition file with the section header "FORCED_SUBSTRATES" and a list of the associated substrates.

###### Manual Community Design Process

The design process can also be performed step-by-step using the mentioned executables in case the user wants to examine intermediate files in the process.  You would start this step-by-step approach by running `write_design_problem`, which takes in the same arguments as `design_community` (including the additional arguments) and prints the associated problem in its ILP formulation:

`./write_design_problem problem_definition_file > ilp_formulation.txt`

This output contains the definition of all variables and constraints in the ILP problem, which is then used as input for an ILP solver.  In our case, we used the CBC ILP solver, which uses a branch-and-cut search algorithm:

`./cbc -import ilp_formulation.txt -branchAnd -solution design_solution.txt`

The solution file either reports an infeasible integer solution, or identifies all non-zero variables in the feasible solution.  For the design algorithm, the non-zero variables will be the species for the solution community as well as the reactions used to get from the given substrates to the desired products.  To extract just the species for the solution community, you can use the `get_solution_species` executable:

`./get_solution_species.py design_solution.txt > solution_species.txt`
